[July 27-8, 2021] CodeQL package manager: update CodeQL CLI docs (beta) (#6339)
github/codeql: docs/codeql/codeql-cli/creating-and-working-with-codeql-packs.rst

.. _creating-and-working-with-codeql-packs:

Creating and working with CodeQL packs
======================================

You can use CodeQL packs to create, share, depend on, and run CodeQL queries and libraries.

.. include:: ../reusables/beta-note-package-manager.rst

About CodeQL packs and the CodeQL CLI package manager
-----------------------------------------------------

> With CodeQL packs and the CodeQL CLI package manager, you can publish your custom queries and integrate them into your codebase analysis.

Reviewer: I'll update this and check for other instances of the package manager.

With CodeQL packs and the CodeQL CLI package manager, you can publish your custom queries and integrate them into your CodeQL code scanning workflow to run and analyze your codebase.

There are two types of CodeQL packs: query packs and library packs.

* Query packs are designed to be run. The query packs are bundled with all transitive dependencies and a compilation cache is included in the tarball.
* Library packs are designed to be used by query packs (or other library packs) and do not contain queries themselves. The libraries are not compiled and there is no compilation cache included in the final pack.

You can use the CodeQL package manger in the CodeQL CLI to create CodeQL packs, add dependencies to packs, and install or update dependencies. You can also publish and download CodeQL packs using the CodeQL package manager. For more information, see ":doc:`Publishing and using CodeQL packs <publishing-and-using-codeql-packs>`."

Running ``codeql pack init``
----------------------------
You can create CodeQL packs are by running the following command from the checkout root of your project:

::

  codeql pack init <scope>/<pack>

You must specify:

> - ``<scope>``: the name of the GitHub organization that you will publish to.

Reviewer 2: It can be a personal account. Basically, the full name of a pack has the same form as the full name of a GitHub repo.

- ``<pack>``: the name for the pack that you are creating.

The ``codeql pack init`` command creates the directory structure and configuration files for a CodeQL pack. By default, the command creates a query pack. If you want to create a library pack, you must edit the ``qlpack.yml`` file to explicitly declare the file as a library pack by including the ``library:true`` property.

Modifying an existing QL pack to create a CodeQL pack
-----------------------------------------------------
If you already have a ``qlpack.yml`` file, you can edit it manually to be a CodeQL pack.

#. Edit the name so that it matches the format ``<scope>/<name>``, where ``<scope>`` is the name of the GitHub organization that you will publish to.

> #. In the ``qlpack.yml`` file, include a version property with a semver identifier.

Reviewer 3: Also, you can optionally include a dependencies block.

Adding and installing dependencies to a CodeQL pack
---------------------------------------------------
You can add dependencies on CodeQL packs using the command ``codeql pack add``. You can specify the scope, name, and version.

::

  codeql pack add <scope>/<name>@x.x.x <scope>/<other-name>

The version number is optional. If you leave off the version number, the latest version will be added.

> This command updates the ``qlpack.yml`` file with the requested dependencies and downloads them into the package cache.

Reviewer 3: Maybe add a warning that this command will reformat the file and strip all comments out.

Modifying an existing QL pack to create a CodeQL pack
-----------------------------------------------------
If you already have a ``qlpack.yml`` file, you can edit it manually to convert it into a CodeQL pack.

> #. Edit the ``name`` property so that it matches the format ``<scope>/<name>``, where ``<scope>`` is the name of the GitHub organization that you will publish to.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
#. Edit the ``name`` property so that it matches the format ``<scope>/<name>``, where ``<scope>`` is the name of the GitHub organization or user account that you will publish to.
```

#. In the ``qlpack.yml`` file, include a ``version`` property with a semver identifier, as well as an optional ``dependencies`` block.

For more information about the properties, see ":ref:`About CodeQL packs <about-codeql-packs>`."

> Adding and installing dependencies to a CodeQL pack

Reviewer 3: Below, can you change `version` to `version range`?

> The version number is optional. If you leave off the version number, the latest version will be added.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The version range is optional. If you leave off the version range, the latest version will be added. Otherwise, the latest version that satisfies the requested range will be added.
```
